Hello friends.
This is Max Egorov and you are watching the
second part of the series of short videos
on my successful attempt to colonize a totally
wild and secluded place.
You are looking at the Russian forest, where
such hot weather is not common.
In the summer it is fairly warm and never
gets dark.
You might have heard about white nights in
St.Petersburg.
We are approximately 300 km north of it.
the rest of the year the weather here is very
harsh thus building a reliable shelter is
a must.
I decided to build my log cabin without chopping
down a single live tree.
A lot of the tall trees here were downed by
a severe storm a few years ago.
So, I decided to reclaim those extra-thick
logs for my cabin's construction.
I chose a round notch (also knows as a saddle
cope) to join logs in my cabin.
I used a piece of charcoal to layout the log
joint
because it could draw well on the wet log.
Most of the material was removed with a chainsaw
and a small prybar and then I finished shaping
the notch with a hand adze.
I used my Finnish axe and adze to make the
longitudinal groves.
I have to confess, towards the end of the
cabin's construction I used my chainsaw more
and more for rough shaping of both notches
and groves to speed up the process.
According to the construction code in Russia,
the longitudinal groove should be half the
width of the top log's diameter.
That will make your log cabin more energy
efficient.
The downside, to strictly following this code,
is it will take more logs and more work to
build the same size cabin.
If you are planning to live in a log cabin
during the winter it is advisable to make
the longitudinal groove wider than I did in
order to sink the top log deeper into the
bottom log.
While fitting the logs I had to move a heavy
log back and forth.
It was easy to do using a pry bar and a strap's
loop.
My seemingly unwise decision to carry a heavy
pry bar strapped to my backpack while getting
to my camp site on foot paid off.
It became an important tool in my cabin's
construction.
Another tool that I was glad I brought with
me was my homemade draw shave.
I was able to easily debark and smoothen the
wet logs using the draw shave.
I also used it to do the finishing touches
on the log butts, which made the cabin look
more refined.
To make my cabin stronger I used square wooden
stakes to secure each log's layer.
It is a bit ironic but this is what old carpenters
used to do.
They hammered square wooden stakes into predrilled
round holes.
Go figure...
I think it is done so because it's easier
to make a square wooden stake
than a dowel and such fastener would less
likely split the log.
Anyhow, I couldn't come up with a better explanation
on that strange classical practice.
If you know other reasons why the wooden stakes
are made square please let me know.
Lastly, it is important to trim the wooden
stake a little below the level of the log
so it wouldn't stick out when the logs dry
out and shrink in diameter.
I filled the grooves with moss for better
insulation.
This is my first experience in laying logs
and things were not going very smoothly in
the beginning; however,
it turned out to be an enjoyable and comparatively
simple experience.
I want to show you two panoramic sceneries
of the same place.
As you can see this small piece of land looks
quite different from now.
However, right outside of my camp the forest
is littered with tall fallen trees that are
just rotting...
If I didn't run other projects at the same
time,
such as making kayaks from branches with tarp
or clear plastic skin, making a dome from
branches and plastic wrap, making canopies,
hammocks, primitive sawmill
as well as fishing and mushrooming,
I probably would have finished my log cabin
by the end of my one month vacation.
In reality I will have to come back here next
year to finish building my cabin.
I will show it in the next part.
If you liked the video, perhaps, you could
share it with your friends.
Let good people watch good videos!
This is Max Egorov